Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia   (Redirected from Mahatma gandhi) Jump to: navigation, search "Gandhi" redirects here. For other uses, see Gandhi (disambiguation). Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi Born 2 October 1869(1869-10-02) Porbandar, Kathiawar Agency, British India[1] Died 30 January 1948(1948-01-30) (aged 78) New Delhi, Dominion of India Cause of death Assassination by shooting Resting place Rajghat, New Delhi, India 28°38?29?N 77°14?54?E? / ?28.6415°N 77.2483°E? / 28.6415; 77.2483 Nationality Indian Other names Mahatma Gandhi, Bapu Alma mater University College London,[2] University of London Known for Prominent figure of Indian independence movement Propounding the philosophy of Satyagraha and Ahimsa Advocating non-violence Pacifism Religion Hinduism Spouse Kasturba Gandhi Children Harilal Manilal Ramdas Devdas child who died in infancy Parents Putlibai Gandhi (Mother) Karamchand Gandhi (Father) Signature Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi (Gujarati: ??????? ?????? ?????; Hindi: ??????? ?????? ?????, pronounced: [mo????nd?a?s k??r?mt??nd? ??a?nd??i] ( listen). 2 October 1869[1] – 30 January 1948) was the pre-eminent political and ideological leader of India during the Indian independence movement. Pioneering the use of non-violent resistance to tyranny through mass civil disobedience, a tool to fight for civil rights and freedom that he called satyagraha, he founded his doctrine of nonviolent protest to achieve political and social progress based upon ahimsa, or total nonviolence for which he is internationally renowned.[3][4] Gandhi led India to its independence and inspired movements for civil rights and freedom across the world.[5] Gandhi is often referred to as Mahatma ([m???a?t?ma?]; Sanskrit: ??????? mah?tm? or "Great Soul," an honorific first applied to him by Rabindranath Tagore).[6] In India, he is also called Bapu (Gujarati: ????, b?pu or "Father") and officially honoured as the Father of the Nation. His birthday, 2 October, is commemorated in India as Gandhi Jayanti, a national holiday, and worldwide as the International Day of Non-Violence. Gandhi first employed non-violent civil disobedience as an expatriate lawyer in South Africa, in the resident Indian community's struggle for civil rights. After his return to India in 1915, he set about organising peasants, farmers, and urban labourers in protesting excessive land-tax and discrimination. Assuming leadership of the Indian National Congress in 1921, Gandhi led nationwide campaigns for easing poverty, expanding women's rights, building religious and ethnic amity, ending untouchability, increasing economic self-reliance, but above all for achieving Swaraj—the independence of India from foreign domination. Gandhi famously led Indians in protesting the British-imposed salt tax with the 400 km (250 mi) Dandi Salt March in 1930, and later in calling for the British to Quit India in 1942. He was imprisoned for many years, upon many occasions, in both South Africa and India. Gandhi strove to practice non-violence and truth in all situations, and advocated that others do the same. He lived modestly in a self-sufficient residential community and wore the traditional Indian dhoti and shawl, woven with yarn he had hand spun on a charkha. He ate simple vegetarian food, and also undertook long fasts as means of both self-purification and social protest. Gandhi was assassinated on 30 January 1948, by Nathuram Godse, a Hindu nationalist who felt Gandhi was sympathetic to the Muslims. January 30, hence is observed as Martyrs' Day in India. Contents  [hide]  1 Early life and background 2 English barrister 3 Civil rights movement in South Africa (1893–1914) 3.1 Reactions to blacks 4 Struggle for Indian Independence (1915–45) 4.1 Role in World War I 4.2 Champaran and Kheda 4.3 Non-cooperation 4.4 Salt Satyagraha (Salt March) 4.4.1 Women 4.4.2 Gandhi as folk hero 4.4.3 Negotiations 4.5 World War II and Quit India 5 Partition of India 6 Assassination 6.1 Ashes 7 Principles, practices and beliefs 7.1 Tolstoy 7.2 Truth & Satyagraha 7.3 Nonviolence 7.4 Food and fasting 7.5 Celibacy 7.6 Nai Talim, Basic Education 7.7 Swaraj, Self-Rule 8 Literary works 9 Legacy and depictions in popular culture 9.1 Followers and international influence 9.2 Global holidays 9.3 Awards 9.4 Film and literature 9.5 Current impact within India 10 Notes 11 References 11.1 Primary sources 12 External links Early life and background Mahatma Gandhi in his earliest known photo, aged 7, c. 1876 Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi[7] was born on 2 October 1869 [1] in Porbandar, a coastal town which was then part of the Bombay Presidency, British India.[8] He was born in his ancestral home, now known as Kirti Mandir, Porbandar.[9] His father, Karamchand Gandhi (1822–1885), who belonged to the Hindu Modh community, served as the diwan (a high official) of Porbander state, a small princely state in the Kathiawar Agency of British India.[10] His grandfather was Uttamchand Gandhi, fondly called Utta Gandhi.[9] His mother, Putlibai, who came from the Hindu Pranami Vaishnava community, was Karamchand's fourth wife, the first three wives having apparently died in childbirth.[11] Growing up with a devout mother and the Jain traditions of the region, the young Mohandas absorbed early the influences that would play an important role in his adult life; these included compassion for sentient beings, vegetarianism, fasting for self-purification, and mutual tolerance among individuals of different creeds.[12] The Indian classics, especially the stories of Shravana and Maharaja Harishchandra, had a great impact on Gandhi in his childhood. In his autobiography, he admits that it left an indelible impression on his mind. He writes: "It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without number." Gandhi's early self-identification with Truth and Love as supreme values is traceable to these epic characters.[13][14] In May 1883, the 13-year-old Mohandas was married to 14-year-old Kasturbai Makhanji (her first name was usually shortened to "Kasturba", and affectionately to "Ba") in an arranged child marriage, according to the custom of the region.[15] Recalling the day of their marriage, he once said, "As we didn't know much about marriage, for us it meant only wearing new clothes, eating sweets and playing with relatives." However, as was also the custom of the region, the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents' house, and away from her husband.[16] In 1885, when Gandhi was 15, the couple's first child was born, but survived only a few days, and Gandhi's father, Karamchand Gandhi, had died earlier that year.[17] Mohandas and Kasturba had four more children, all sons: Harilal, born in 1888; Manilal, born in 1892; Ramdas, born in 1897; and Devdas, born in 1900. At his middle school in Porbandar and high school in Rajkot, Gandhi remained an average student. He passed the matriculation exam for Samaldas College at Bhavnagar, Gujarat, with some difficulty. While there, he was unhappy, in part because his family wanted him to become a barrister. English barrister Gandhi and his wife Kasturba (1902) In 1888, Gandhi travelled to London, England, to study law at University College London where he studied Indian law and jurisprudence and to train as a barrister at the Inner Temple. His time in the Imperial capital, was influenced by a vow he had made to his mother in the presence of the Jain monk Becharji, upon leaving India, to observe the Hindu precepts of abstinence from meat, alcohol, and promiscuity.[18] Although Gandhi experimented with adopting "English" customs—taking dancing lessons for example—he could not stomach the bland vegetarian food offered by his landlady, and he was always hungry until he found one of London's few vegetarian restaurants. Influenced by Henry Salt's book, he joined the Vegetarian Society, was elected to its executive committee,[19] and started a local Bayswater chapter.[11] Some of the vegetarians he met were members of the Theosophical Society, which had been founded in 1875 to further universal brotherhood, and which was devoted to the study of Buddhist and Hindu literature. They encouraged Gandhi to join them in reading the Bhagavad Gita both in translation as well as in the original.[19] Not having shown interest in religion before, he became interested in religious thought and began to read up on it. Gandhi was called to the bar in June 1891 and then left London for India, where he learned that his mother had died while he was in London and that his family had kept the news from him.[19] His attempts at establishing a law practice in Bombay failed because he was too shy to speak up in court. He returned to Rajkot to make a modest living drafting petitions for litigants, a business he was forced to close when he ran afoul of a British officer.[11][19] In 1893 he eagerly accepted a year-long contract from Dada Abdulla & Co., an Indian firm, to a post in the Colony of Natal, South Africa, then part of the British Empire.[11] Civil rights movement in South Africa (1893–1914) Main article: Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in South Africa Gandhi in South Africa (1895) Gandhi spent 21 years in South Africa, where he developed his political views, his ethics, and his political leadership skills. The Indians in South Africa were led by wealthy Muslims, who employed Gandhi as a lawyer, and by impoverished Hindu indentured laborers with very limited rights. Gandhi considered them all to be Indians, taking a lifetime view that "Indianness" transcended religion and caste. He believed he could bridge historic differences, especially regarding religion, and that belief he brought back to India and tried to implement. The South African experience created handicaps that Gandhi did not realize—he was out of contact with the enormous complexities of religious and cultural life in India, and believed he understood India by getting to know and leading Indians in South Africa.[20] Furthermore the officials he was dealing with were much more liberal than the British officials in India—General Smuts, for example, was a world class philosopher with a broad vision; he was an Africaaner willing to negotiate and compromise, not an Englishman defending the Raj against another Mutiny like 1857.[21] In South Africa, Gandhi faced the discrimination directed at all coloured people. He was thrown off a train at Pietermaritzburg after refusing to move from the first-class; he protested and was allowed on first class the next day.[22] Travelling farther on by stagecoach, he was beaten by a driver for refusing to move to make room for a European passenger.[23] He suffered other hardships on the journey as well, including being barred from several hotels. In another incident, the magistrate of a Durban court ordered Gandhi to remove his turban, which he refused to do.[24] These events were a turning point in Gandhi's life: they shaped his social activism and awakened him to social injustice. After witnessing racism, prejudice and injustice against Indians in South Africa, Gandhi began to question his place in society and his people's standing in the British Empire. Gandhi extended his original period of stay in South Africa to assist Indians in opposing a bill to deny them the right to vote. Though unable to halt the bill's passage, his campaign was successful in drawing attention to the grievances of Indians in South Africa. He helped found the Natal Indian Congress in 1894,[11][22] and through this organisation, he moulded the Indian community of South Africa into a unified political force. In January 1897, when Gandhi landed in Durban, a mob of white settlers attacked him and he escaped only through the efforts of the wife of the police superintendent. He, however, refused to press charges against any member of the mob, stating it was one of his principles not to seek redress for a personal wrong in a court of law.[11] In 1906, the Transvaal government promulgated a new Act compelling registration of the colony's Indian population. At a mass protest meeting held in Johannesburg on 11 September that year, Gandhi adopted his still evolving methodology of satyagraha (devotion to the truth), or non-violent protest, for the first time. He urged Indians to defy the new law and to suffer the punishments for doing so. The community adopted this plan, and during the ensuing seven-year struggle, thousands of Indians were jailed, flogged, or shot for striking, refusing to register, for burning their registration cards or engaging in other forms of non-violent resistance. The government successfully repressed the Indian protesters, but the public outcry over the harsh treatment of peaceful Indian protesters by the South African government forced South African General Jan Christiaan Smuts to negotiate a compromise with Gandhi. Gandhi's ideas took shape, and the concept of satyagraha matured during this struggle. Reactions to blacks M.K. Gandhi while serving in the Ambulance Corps during the Boer War (1899) After the black majority came to power in South Africa, Gandhi was proclaimed a national hero with numerous monuments.[25] Gandhi focused his attention on Indians in South Africa, but historians have also examined his changing ideas on the proper role for blacks. White rule enforced strict segregation among all races and generated conflict between these communities). At first Gandhi shared racial notions prevalent in the 1890s. Bhana and Vahed argue that Gandhi's experiences in jail sensitized him to the plight of blacks. "His negative views in the Johannesburg jail were reserved for hardened African prisoners rather than Africans generally."[26] In 1906, the British declared war against the Zulu kingdom in Natal. Gandhi actively encouraged the British to recruit Indians. He argued that Indians should support the war efforts in order to legitimise their claims to full citizenship. The British accepted Gandhi's offer to let a detachment of 20 Indians volunteer as a stretcher-bearer corps to treat wounded British soldiers. This corps was commanded by Gandhi and operated for less than two months.[27] The experience taught him it was hopeless to directly challenge the overwhelming military power of the British army—he decided it could only be resisted in non-violent fashion by the pure of heart.[18]:109 Struggle for Indian Independence (1915–45) See also: Indian independence movement In 1915, Gandhi returned to India permanently. He brought a reputation as a leading Indian nationalist, theorist and organizer. He joined the Indian National Congress and was introduced to Indian issues, politics and the Indian people primarily by Gopal Krishna Gokhale. Gokhale was a key leader of the Congress Party best known for his restraint and moderation, and his insistence on working inside the system. Gandhi took Gokhale's liberal approach based on British Whiggish traditions and transformed it to make it look wholly Indian.[28] Role in World War I Main article: World War I#The role of India In April 1918, during the latter part of World War I, the Viceroy invited Gandhi to a War Conference in Delhi.[29] Perhaps to show his support for the Empire and help his case for India's independence,[30]:236 Gandhi agreed to actively recruit Indians for the war effort.[31] In contrast to the Zulu War of 1906 and the outbreak of World War I in 1914, when he recruited volunteers for the Ambulance Corps, this time Gandhi attempted to recruit combatants. In a June 1918 leaflet entitled "Appeal for Enlistment", Gandhi wrote "To bring about such a state of things we should have the ability to defend ourselves, that is, the ability to bear arms and to use them...If we want to learn the use of arms with the greatest possible despatch, it is our duty to enlist ourselves in the army."[32] He did, however, stipulate in a letter to the Viceroy's private secretary that he "personally will not kill or injure anybody, friend or foe."[33] Gandhi's war recruitment campaign brought into question his consistency on nonviolence as his friend Charlie Andrews confirms, "Personally I have never been able to reconcile this with his own conduct in other respects, and it is one of the points where I have found myself in painful disagreement."[34] Gandhi's private secretary also had acknowledged that "The question of the consistency between his creed of 'Ahimsa' (non-violence) and his recruiting campaign was raised not only then but has been discussed ever since."[31] Champaran and Kheda Main article: Champaran and Kheda Satyagraha Gandhi in 1918, at the time of the Kheda and Champaran satyagrahas Gandhi's first major achievements came in 1918 with the Champaran and Kheda agitations of Bihar and Gujarat. The Champaran agitation pitted the local peasantry against their largely British landlords who were backed by the local administration. The peasantry was forced to grow Indigo, a cash crop whose demand had been declining over two decades, and were forced to sell their crops to the planters at a fixed price. Unhappy wIth this, the peasantry appealed to Gandhi at his ashram in Ahmedabad. Pursuing a strategy of non-violent protest, Gandhi took the administration by surprise and won concessions from the authorities.[35] In 1918, Kheda was hit by floods and famine and the peasantry was demanding relief from taxes. Using non-cooperation as a technique, Gandhi advocated the non-payment of taxes even under the threat of confiscation of land.[36] Gandhi established an ashram there, organising scores of his veteran supporters and fresh volunteers from the region. He organised a detailed study and survey of the villages, accounting for the atrocities and terrible episodes of suffering, including the general state of degenerate living. Building on the confidence of villagers, he began leading the clean-up of villages, building of schools and hospitals and encouraging the village leadership to undo and condemn many social evils such as untouchability and alcoholism.[37] His most important impact came when he was arrested by police on the charge of creating unrest and was ordered to leave the province. Hundreds of thousands of people protested and rallied outside the jail, police stations and courts demanding his release, which the court reluctantly granted. Gandhi led organised protests and strikes against the landlords. With the guidance of the British government, these landlords agreed to suspend revenue hikes until the famine ended and to grant the poor farmers of the region increased compensation and control over farming. It was during this agitation that Gandhi was addressed by the people as Bapu (Father) and Mahatma (Great Soul). In Kheda, Sardar Patel represented the farmers in negotiations with the British, who suspended revenue collection and released all the prisoners. Gandhi's popularity rose in India post this agitation.[citation needed] Non-cooperation Main article: Non-cooperation movement Mahatama Gandhi spinning an yarn Gandhi employed non-cooperation, non-violence and peaceful resistance as his "weapons" in the struggle against the British Raj. In Punjab, the Jallianwala Bagh massacre of civilians by British troops (also known as the Amritsar Massacre) caused deep trauma to the nation, leading to increased public anger and acts of violence. Gandhi criticised both the actions of the British Raj and the retaliatory violence of Indians. He authored the resolution offering condolences to British civilian victims and condemning the riots which, after initial opposition in the party, was accepted following Gandhi's emotional speech advocating his principle that all violence was evil and could not be justified.[38] After the massacre and subsequent violence, Gandhi began to focus on winning complete self-government and control of all Indian government institutions, maturing soon into Swaraj or complete individual, spiritual, political independence.[39] Sabarmati Ashram, Gandhi's home in Gujarat In December 1921, Gandhi was invested with executive authority on behalf of the Indian National Congress. Under his leadership, the Congress was reorganised with a new constitution, with the goal of Swaraj. Membership in the party was opened to anyone prepared to pay a token fee. A hierarchy of committees was set up to improve discipline, transforming the party from an elite organisation to one of mass national appeal. Gandhi expanded his non-violence platform to include the swadeshi policy—the boycott of foreign-made goods, especially British goods. Linked to this was his advocacy that khadi (homespun cloth) be worn by all Indians instead of British-made textiles. Gandhi exhorted Indian men and women, rich or poor, to spend time each day spinning khadi in support of the independence movement.[40] Gandhi even invented a small, portable spinning wheel that could be folded into the size of a small typewriter.[41] This was a strategy to inculcate discipline and dedication to weeding out the unwilling and ambitious and to include women in the movement at a time when many thought that such activities were not respectable activities for women. In addition to boycotting British products, Gandhi urged the people to boycott British educational institutions and law courts, to resign from government employment, and to forsake British titles and honours.[42] "Non-cooperation" enjoyed widespread appeal and success, increasing excitement and participation from all strata of Indian society. Yet, just as the movement reached its apex, it ended abruptly as a result of a violent clash in the town of Chauri Chaura, Uttar Pradesh, in February 1922. Fearing that the movement was about to take a turn towards violence, and convinced that this would be the undoing of all his work, Gandhi called off the campaign of mass civil disobedience.[43] This was the third time that Gandhi had called off a major campaign.[44] Gandhi was arrested on 10 March 1922, tried for sedition, and sentenced to six years' imprisonment. He began his sentence on 18 March 1922. He was released in February 1924 for an appendicitis operation, having served only 2 years.[45] Without Gandhi's unifying personality, the Indian National Congress began to splinter during his years in prison, splitting into two factions, one led by Chitta Ranjan Das and Motilal Nehru favouring party participation in the legislatures, and the other led by Chakravarti Rajagopalachari and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, opposing this move. Furthermore, cooperation among Hindus and Muslims, which had been strong at the height of the non-violence campaign, was breaking down. Gandhi attempted to bridge these differences through many means, including a three-week fast in the autumn of 1924, but with limited success.[46] Salt Satyagraha (Salt March) Main article: Salt Satyagraha Original footage of Gandhi and his followers marching to Dandi in the Salt Satyagraha Gandhi stayed out of active politics and, as such, the limelight for most of the 1920s. He focused instead on resolving the wedge between the Swaraj Party and the Indian National Congress, and expanding initiatives against untouchability, alcoholism, ignorance and poverty. He returned to the fore in 1928. In the preceding year, the British government had appointed a new constitutional reform commission under Sir John Simon, which did not include any Indian as its member. The result was a boycott of the commission by Indian political parties. Gandhi pushed through a resolution at the Calcutta Congress in December 1928 calling on the British government to grant India dominion status or face a new campaign of non-cooperation with complete independence for the country as its goal. Gandhi had not only moderated the views of younger men like Subhas Chandra Bose and Jawaharlal Nehru, who sought a demand for immediate independence, but also reduced his own call to a one year wait, instead of two.[47] The British did not respond. On 31 December 1929, the flag of India was unfurled in Lahore. 26 January 1930 was celebrated as India's Independence Day by the Indian National Congress meeting in Lahore. This day was commemorated by almost every other Indian organisation. Gandhi then launched a new satyagraha against the tax on salt in March 1930. This was highlighted by the famous Salt March to Dandi from 12 March to 6 April, where he marched 388 kilometres (241 mi) from Ahmedabad to Dandi, Gujarat to make salt himself. Thousands of Indians joined him on this march to the sea. This campaign was one of his most successful at upsetting British hold on India; Britain responded by imprisoning over 60,000 people.[48] Women Salt as a household necessity was of special interest to women. Gandhi strongly favoured the emancipation of women, and he went so far as to say that "the women have come to look upon me as one of themselves." He opposed purdah, child marriage, untouchability, and the extreme oppression of Hindu widows, up to and including sati. He especially recruited women to participate in the salt tax campaigns and the boycott of foreign products. [49] Sarma concludes that Gandhi's success in enlisting women in his campaigns, including the salt tax campaign, anti-untouchability campaign and the peasant movement, gave many women a new self-confidence and dignity in the mainstream of Indian public life.[50] Gandhi as folk hero Congress in the 1920s appealed to peasants by portraying Gandhi as a sort of Messiah, a strategy that succeeded in incorporating radical forces within the peasantry into the nonviolent resistance movement. In thousands of villages plays were performed that presented Gandhi as the reincarnation of earlier Indian nationalist leaders, or even as a demigod. The plays built support among illiterate peasants steeped in traditional Hindu culture. Similar messianic imagery appeared in popular songs and poems, and in Congress-sponsored religious pageants and celebrations. The result was Gandhi became not only a folk hero but the Congress was widely seen in the villages as his sacred instrument. [51] Negotiations Mahadev Desai (left) reading out a letter to Gandhi from the viceroy at Birla House, Bombay, 7 April 1939 The government, represented by Lord Edward Irwin, decided to negotiate with Gandhi. The Gandhi–Irwin Pact was signed in March 1931. The British Government agreed to free all political prisoners, in return for the suspension of the civil disobedience movement. Also as a result of the pact, Gandhi was invited to attend the Round Table Conference in London as the sole representative of the Indian National Congress. The conference was a disappointment to Gandhi and the nationalists, because it focused on the Indian princes and Indian minorities rather than on a transfer of power. Furthermore, Lord Irwin's successor, Lord Willingdon, began a new campaign of controlling and subduing the nationalist movement. Gandhi was again arrested, and the government tried to negate his influence by completely isolating him from his followers. But this tactic failed.[citation needed] In 1932, through the campaigning of the Dalit leader B. R. Ambedkar, the government granted untouchables separate electorates under the new constitution. In protest, Gandhi embarked on a six-day fast in September 1932. The resulting public outcry successfully forced the government to adopt an equitable arrangement through negotiations mediated by Palwankar Baloo. This was the start of a new campaign by Gandhi to improve the lives of the untouchables, whom he named Harijans, the children of God.[52] On 8 May 1933, Gandhi began a 21-day fast of self-purification to help the Harijan movement.[53] This new campaign was not universally embraced within the Dalit community, as prominent leader B. R. Ambedkar condemned Gandhi's use of the term Harijans as saying that Dalits were socially immature, and that privileged caste Indians played a paternalistic role. Ambedkar and his allies also felt Gandhi was undermining Dalit political rights. Gandhi had also refused to support the untouchables in 1924–25 when they were campaigning for the right to pray in temples. Because of Gandhi's actions, Ambedkar described him as "devious and untrustworthy".[44] Gandhi, although born into the Vaishya caste, insisted that he was able to speak on behalf of Dalits, despite the presence of Dalit activists such as Ambedkar.[citation needed] In the summer of 1934, three attempts were made on Gandhi's life.[54][55] When the Congress Party chose to contest elections and accept power under the Federation scheme, Gandhi resigned from party membership. He did not disagree with the party's move, but felt that if he resigned, his popularity with Indians would cease to stifle the party's membership, which actually varied, including communists, socialists, trade unionists, students, religious conservatives, and those with pro-business convictions, and that these various voices would get a chance to make themselves heard. Gandhi also wanted to avoid being a target for Raj propaganda by leading a party that had temporarily accepted political accommodation with the Raj.[56] Gandhi returned to active politics again in 1936, with the Nehru presidency and the Lucknow session of the Congress. Although Gandhi wanted a total focus on the task of winning independence and not speculation about India's future, he did not restrain the Congress from adopting socialism as its goal. Gandhi had a clash with Subhas Chandra Bose, who had been elected president in 1938, and who had previously expressed a lack of faith in non-violence as a means of protest. Despite Gandhi's opposition, Bose won a second term as Congress President, but left the Congress when the All-India leaders resigned en masse in protest of his abandonment of the principles introduced by Gandhi.[57][58] World War II and Quit India Main articles: World War II and Quit India Movement Gandhi initially favoured offering "non-violent moral support" to the British effort when World War II broke out in 1939, but the Congressional leaders were offended by the unilateral inclusion of India in the war without consultation of the people's representatives. All Congressmen resigned from office.[59] After long deliberations, Gandhi declared that India could not be party to a war ostensibly being fought for democratic freedom while that freedom was denied to India itself. As the war progressed, Gandhi intensified his demand for independence, calling for the British to Quit India in a speech at Gowalia Tank Maidan. This was Gandhi's and the Congress Party's most definitive revolt aimed at securing the British exit from India.[60] Gandhi was criticised by some Congress party members and other Indian political groups, both pro-British and anti-British. Some felt that not supporting Britain more in its struggle against Nazi Germany was unethical. Others felt that Gandhi's refusal for India to participate in the war was insufficient and more direct opposition should be taken, while Britain fought against Nazism yet continued to contradict itself by refusing to grant India Independence. Quit India became the most forceful movement in the history of the struggle, with mass arrests and violence on an unprecedented scale.[61] Thousands of freedom fighters were killed or injured by police gunfire, and hundreds of thousands were arrested. Gandhi and his supporters made it clear they would not support the war effort unless India were granted immediate independence. He even clarified that this time the movement would not be stopped if individual acts of violence were committed, saying that the "ordered anarchy" around him was "worse than real anarchy." He called on all Congressmen and Indians to maintain discipline via ahimsa, and Karo Ya Maro ("Do or Die") in the cause of ultimate freedom.[39] Gandhi and the entire Congress Working Committee were arrested in Bombay by the British on 9 August 1942. Gandhi was held for two years in the Aga Khan Palace in Pune. It was here that Gandhi suffered two terrible blows in his personal life. His 50-year old secretary Mahadev Desai died of a heart attack 6 days later and his wife Kasturba died after 18 months imprisonment on 22 February 1944; six weeks later Gandhi suffered a severe malaria attack. He was released before the end of the war on 6 May 1944 because of his failing health and necessary surgery; the Raj did not want him to die in prison and enrage the nation. He came out of detention to an altered political scene—the Muslim League for example, which a few years earlier had appeared marginal, "now occupied the centre of the political stage"[62] and the topic of Jinnah's campaign for Pakistan was a major talking point. Gandhi met Jinnah in September 1944 in Bombay but Jinnah rejected, on the grounds that it fell short of a fully independent Pakistan, his proposal of the right of Muslim provinces to opt out of substantial parts of the forthcoming political union.[citation needed] Although the Quit India movement had moderate success in its objective, the ruthless suppression of the movement[clarification needed] brought order to India by the end of 1943. At the end of the war, the British gave clear indications that power would be transferred to Indian hands. At this point Gandhi called off the struggle, and around 100,000 political prisoners were released, including the Congress's leadership.[citation needed] Partition of India See also: Partition of India While the Indian National Congress and Gandhi called for the British to quit India, the Muslim League passed a resolution for them to divide and quit, in 1943.[63] Gandhi is believed to have been opposed to the partition during independence and suggested an agreement which required the Congress and Muslim League to cooperate and attain independence under a provisional government, thereafter, the question of partition could be resolved by a plebiscite in the districts with a Muslim majority.[64] When Jinnah called for Direct Action, on 16 August 1946, Gandhi was infuriated and visited the most riot prone areas to stop the massacres, personally.[65] He made strong efforts to unite the Indian Hindus, Muslims and Christians and struggled for the emancipation of the "untouchables" in Hindu society.[66] On the 14 and 15 August 1947 the Indian Independence Act was invoked and the following carnage witnessed a displacement of up to 12.5 million people in the former British Indian Empire with an estimated loss of life varying from several hundred thousand to a million.[67] But for his teachings, the efforts of his followers, and his own presence, there would have been much more bloodshed during the partition, according to prominent Norwegian historian, Jens Arup Seip.[68] Stanley Wolpert's words sum up Gandhi's role and views on the partition perfectly: Their plan to carve up British India was never approved of or accepted by Gandhi, however, who realised too late that his closest comrades and disciples were more interested in power than principle, and that his own vision had long been clouded by the illusion that the struggle he led for India's freedom was a nonviolent one. — Stanley Wolpert, Gandhi's Passion, The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi, Oxford University Press Assassination See also: Assassination of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi Raj Ghat, Delhi is a memorial to Mahatma Gandhi that marks the spot of his cremation On 30 January 1948, Gandhi was shot while he was walking to a platform from which he was to address a prayer meeting. The assassin, Nathuram Godse, was a Hindu nationalist with links to the extremist Hindu Mahasabha, who held Gandhi responsible for weakening India by insisting upon a payment to Pakistan.[69] Godse and his co-conspirator Narayan Apte were later tried and convicted; they were executed on 15 November 1949. Gandhi's memorial (or Sam?dhi) at R?j Gh?t, New Delhi, bears the epigraph "H? Ram", (Devanagari: ?? ! ??? or, He R?m), which may be translated as "Oh God". These are widely believed to be Gandhi's last words after he was shot, though the veracity of this statement has been disputed.[70] Jawaharlal Nehru addressed the nation through radio:[71] "Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere, and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it. Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless, we will not see him again, as we have seen him for these many years, we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow, not only for me, but for millions and millions in this country."—Jawaharlal Nehru's address to Gandhi[72] Gandhi's death was mourned nationwide. Over 2 million people joined the 5 mile long funeral procession that took over 5 hours to reach Raj Ghat from Birla house, were he was assassinated. Gandhi's body was transported on a weapons carrier, whose chassis was dismantled overnight to allow a high-floor to be installed so that people could catch a glimpse of his body. The engine of the vehicle was not used, instead 4 drag-ropes manned by 50 people each pulled the vehicle.[73] All Indian owned establishments in London remained closed in mourning as Indians from all over Britain converged at India House in London.[74] Khan argues that Gandhi's death and funeral helped consolidate the authority of the new Indian state. With Nehru in charge, the government made sure everyone knew the guilty party was not a Muslim. Congress tightly controlled the epic public displays of grief over a two-week period—the funeral, mortuary rituals and distribution of the martyr's ashes—as millions participated and hundreds of millions watched. The goal was to assert the power of the government and legitimize the Congress Party's control. This move built upon the massive outpouring of Hindu expressions of grief. The government suppressed the RSS, the Muslim National Guards, and the Khaksars, with some 200,000 arrests. Gandhi's death and funeral linked the distant state with the Indian people and made more understand the need to suppress religious parties during the transition to independence for the Indian people.[75] Ashes Gandhi's ashes were poured into urns which were sent across India for memorial services. Most were immersed at the Sangam at Allahabad on 12 February 1948, but some were secretly taken away.[76] In 1997, Tushar Gandhi immersed the contents of one urn, found in a bank vault and reclaimed through the courts, at the Sangam at Allahabad.[76][77] Some of Gandhi's ashes were scattered at the source of the Nile River near Jinja, Uganda, and a memorial plaque marks the event. On 30 January 2008, the contents of another urn were immersed at Girgaum Chowpatty by the family after a Dubai-based businessman had sent it to a Mumbai museum.[76] Another urn has ended up in a palace of the Aga Khan in Pune[76] (where he had been imprisoned from 1942 to 1944) and another in the Self-Realization Fellowship Lake Shrine in Los Angeles.[78] The family is aware that these enshrined ashes could be misused for political purposes, but does not want to have them removed because it would entail breaking the shrines.[76] Principles, practices and beliefs See also: Gandhism Gandhi's ethical thinking was heavily influenced by a handful of books, which he repeatedly meditated upon. They included especially Plato's Apology, (which he translated into his native Gujarati); William Salter's Ethical Religion (1889); Henry David Thoreau's On the Duty of Civil Disobedience (1847); Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God Is Within You (1893) (in which he first discovered the doctrine of non-violence and love); and John Ruskin's Unto this Last (1862), which he also translated into Gujarati . Ruskin inspired his decision to live an austere life on a commune, at first on the Phoenix Farm in Natal and then on the Tolstoy Farm just outside Johannesburg, South Africa.[20] Gokhale argues that Gandhi took his philosophy of history from Hinduism and Jainism, supplemented by selected Christian traditions and ideas of Tolstoy and Ruskin. Hinduism provided central concepts of God's role in history, of man as the battleground of forces of virtue and sin, and of the potential of love as an historical force. From Jainism, Gandhi took the idea of applying nonviolence to human situations and the theory that Absolute Reality can be comprehended only relatively in human affairs.[79] Spodek argues for the importance of the culture of Gujarat in shaping his methods. He finds that some of Gandhi's most effective methods such as fasting, noncooperation and appeals to the justice and compassion of the rulers were learned as a youth in Gujarat. Later on, the financial, cultural, organizational and geographical support needed to bring his campaigns to a national audience were drawn from Ahmedabad and Gujarat, his Indian residence 1915–1930. [80] Tolstoy In 1908 Tolstoy (1828–1910) wrote A Letter to a Hindu, which said that only by using love as a weapon through passive resistance could the Indian people overthrow colonial rule. In 1909, Gandhi wrote to Tolstoy seeking advice and permission to republish A Letter to a Hindu in Gujarati. Tolstoy responded and the two continued a correspondence until Tolstoy's death in 1910. The letters concern practical and theological applications of non-violence.[81] Gandhi saw himself a disciple of Tolstoy, for they agreed regarding opposition to state authority and colonialism; both hated violence and preached non-resistance. However, they differed sharply on political strategy. Gandhi called for political involvement; he was a nationalist and was prepared to use nonviolent force. He was also willing to compromise.[82] It was at Tolstoy Farm where Gandhi and Hermann Kallenbach (1871–1945) systematically trained their disciples in the philosophy of nonviolence.[83] Truth & Satyagraha "God is truth. The way to truth lies through ahimsa (non-violence)"—Sabarmati 13 March 1927 Gandhi dedicated his life to the wider purpose of discovering truth, or Satya. He tried to achieve this by learning from his own mistakes and conducting experiments on himself. He called his autobiography The Story of My Experiments with Truth. Watson argues that Gandhi based satyagraha on the Vedantic ideal of self-realization, and notes it also contains Jain and Buddhist notions of nonviolence, vegetarianism, the avoidance of killing, and 'agape' (universal love). Gandhi also borrowed Christian-Islamic ideas of equality, the brotherhood of man, and the concept of turning the other cheek. [84] Gandhi stated that the most important battle to fight was overcoming his own demons, fears, and insecurities. Gandhi summarised his beliefs first when he said "God is Truth". He would later change this statement to "Truth is God". Thus, Satya (Truth) in Gandhi's philosophy is "God".[85] The essence of Satyagraha (lit. 'insistence/holding of truth') is that it seeks to eliminate antagonisms without harming the antagonists themselves and seeks to transform or “purify” it to a higher level. A euphemism sometimes used for Satyagraha is that it is a “silent force” or a “soul force” (a term also used by Martin Luther King Jr. during his famous “I Have a Dream” speech). It arms the individual with moral power rather than physical power. Satyagraha is also termed a “universal force,” as it essentially “makes no distinction between kinsmen and strangers, young and old, man and woman, friend and foe.”[86] Gandiji wrote: “There must be no impatience, no barbarity, no insolence, no undue pressure. If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy, we cannot afford to be intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in one's cause.”[87] Civil disobedience and non-cooperation as practised under Satyagraha are based on the “law of suffering”,[88] a doctrine that the endurance of suffering is a means to an end. This end usually implies a moral upliftment or progress of an individual or society. Therefore, non-cooperation in Satyagraha is in fact a means to secure the cooperation of the opponent consistently with truth and justice.[citation needed] Nonviolence Gandhi with textile workers at Darwen, Lancashire, 26 September 1931. Although Gandhi was not the originator of the principle of non-violence, he was the first to apply it in the political field on a large scale.[89] The concept of nonviolence (ahimsa) and nonresistance has a long history in Indian religious thought and has had many revivals in Hindu, Buddhist, Jain, Jewish and Christian contexts. Gandhi explains his philosophy and way of life in his autobiography The Story of My Experiments with Truth. Some of his remarks were widely quoted, such as "An eye for an eye makes the whole world blind."[90] "There are many causes that I am prepared to die for but no causes that I am prepared to kill for."[91] Gandhi's views came under heavy criticism in Britain when it was under attack from Nazi Germany, and later when the Holocaust was revealed. He told the British people in 1940, "I would like you to lay down the arms you have as being useless for saving you or humanity. You will invite Herr Hitler and Signor Mussolini to take what they want of the countries you call your possessions... If these gentlemen choose to occupy your homes, you will vacate them. If they do not give you free passage out, you will allow yourselves, man, woman, and child, to be slaughtered, but you will refuse to owe allegiance to them."[48] In a post-war interview in 1946, he said, "Hitler killed five million Jews. It is the greatest crime of our time. But the Jews should have offered themselves to the butcher’s knife. They should have thrown themselves into the sea from cliffs... It would have aroused the world and the people of Germany... As it is they succumbed anyway in their millions."[92] However, Gandhi realised that this level of nonviolence required incredible faith and courage, which he believed everyone did not possess. He therefore advised that everyone need not keep to nonviolence, especially if it were used as a cover for cowardice, saying, "where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence."[93] Food and fasting Hay argues that Gandhi in London looked into numerous religious and intellectual currents. He especially appreciated how the theosophical movement encouraged a religious eclecticism and an antipathy to atheism. Hay says the vegetarian movement had the greatest impact for it was Gandhi's point of entry into other reformist agendas of the time.[94] The idea of vegetarianism is deeply ingrained in Hindu and Jain traditions in India, especially in his native Gujarat.[95] Gandhi was close to the chairman of the London Vegetarian Society, Dr. Josiah Oldfield, and corresponded with Henry Stephens Salt, a vegetarian campaigner. Gandhi became a strict vegetarian. He wrote the book The Moral Basis of Vegetarianism and wrote for the London Vegetarian Society's publication. [96] Gandhi used fasting as a political device, often threatening suicide unless demands were met. Gandhi noted in his autobiography that vegetarianism was the beginning of his deep commitment to Brahmacharya; without total control of the palate, his success in Bramacharya would likely falter. "You wish to know what the marks of a man are who wants to realize Truth which is God," he wrote. "He must reduce himself to zero and have perfect control over all his senses-beginning with the palate or tongue."[97] [98] Congress publicized the fasts as a political action that generated widespread sympathy. In response the government tried to manipulate news coverage to minimize his challenge to the Raj. He fasted in 1932 to protest the voting scheme for separate political representation for Dalits; Gandhi did not want them segregated. The government stopped the London press from showing photographs of his emaciated body, because it would elicit sympathy. Gandhi's 1943 hunger strike took place during a two-year prison term for the anticolonial Quit India movement. The government called on nutritional experts to demystify his action, and again no photos were allowed. However his final fast in 1948, after India was independent, was lauded by the British press and this time did include full-length photos.[99] Alter argues that Gandhi's fixation on diet and celibacy were much deeper than exercises in self-discipline. Rather, his beliefs regarding health offered a critique of both the traditional Hindu system of ayurvedic medicine and Western concepts. This challenge was integral to his deeper challenge to tradition and modernity, as health and nonviolence became part of the same ethics.[100] Celibacy A core Gandhian value that came in for much bantering and ribald criticism in the west was his celebacy and his experiments in "brahmacharya" or the elimination of all desire. In 1906 Gandhi, married and a father, vowed to abstain from sexual relations. In the 1940s, in his mid-seventies, he brought his grandniece Manubehn to sleep naked in his bed as part of a spiritual experiment in which Gandhi could test himself as a "brahmachari." Two other women also sometimes shared his bed. Gandhi discussed his experiment with friends and relations, and the experiment ceased in 1947.[101] Nai Talim, Basic Education Main article: Nai Talim Nai Talim is a spiritual principle which states that knowledge and work are not separate. Gandhi promoted an educational curriculum with the same name based on this pedagogical principle.[102] It can be translated with the phrase 'Basic Education for all'.[103] However, the concept has several layers of meaning. It developed out of Gandhi's experience with the English educational system and with colonialism in general. In that system, he saw that Indian children would be alienated and 'career-based thinking' would become dominant. In addition, it embodied a series of negative outcomes: the disdain for manual work, the development of a new elite class, and the increasing problems of industrialisation and urbanisation. The three pillars of Gandhi's pedagogy were its focus on the life-long character of education, its social character and its form as a holistic process. For Gandhi, education is 'the moral development of the person', a process that is by definition 'life-long'.[104] Swaraj, Self-Rule Main article: Swaraj Gandhi was a self-described philosophical anarchist,[105][106] and his vision of India meant an India without an underlying government.[107] He once said that "the ideally nonviolent state would be an ordered anarchy."[108] While political systems are largely hierarchical, with each layer of authority from the individual to the central government have increasing levels of authority over the layer below, Gandhi believed that society should be the exact opposite, where nothing is done without the consent of anyone, down to the individual. His idea was that true self-rule in a country means that every person rules his or herself and that there is no state which enforces laws upon the people.[109] This would be achieved over time with nonviolent conflict mediation, as power is divested from layers of hierarchical authorities, ultimately to the individual, which would come to embody the ethic of nonviolence. Rather than a system where rights are enforced by a higher authority, people are self-governed by mutual responsibilities. On returning from South Africa, when Gandhi received a letter asking for his participation in writing a world charter for human rights, he responded saying, "in my experience, it is far more important to have a charter for human duties."[110] A free India for him meant the existence of thousands of self-sufficient small communities (an idea possibly from Tolstoy) who rule themselves without hindering others. It did not mean merely transferring a British established administrative structure into Indian hands which he said was just making Hindustan into Englistan.[111] He wanted to ultimately dissolve the Congress Party after independence and establish a system of direct democracy in India,[112] having no faith in the British styled parliamentary system.[111] Literary works Young India, a journal published by Gandhi Gandhi was a prolific writer. For decades he edited several newspapers including Harijan in Gujarati, in Hindi and in the English language; Indian Opinion while in South Africa and, Young India, in English, and Navajivan, a Gujarati monthly, on his return to India. Later, Navajivan was also published in Hindi. In addition, he wrote letters almost every day to individuals and newspapers.[113] Gandhi also wrote several books including his autobiography, An Autobiography of My Experiments with Truth ((Gujar?t? "?????? ??????? ???? ???????")), of which he bought the entire first edition to make sure it was reprinted.[44]His other autobiographies included: Satyagraha in South Africa about his struggle there, Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule, a political pamphlet, and a paraphrase in Gujarati of John Ruskin's Unto This Last.[114] This last essay can be considered his programme on economics. He also wrote extensively on vegetarianism, diet and health, religion, social reforms, etc. Gandhi usually wrote in Gujarati, though he also revised the Hindi and English translations of his books.[citation needed] Gandhi's complete works were published by the Indian government under the name The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi in the 1960s. The writings comprise about 50,000 pages published in about a hundred volumes. In 2000, a revised edition of the complete works sparked a controversy, as Gandhian followers argue that the government incorporated the changes for political purposes.[citation needed]The Indian government later withdrew the revised edition.[115] Legacy and depictions in popular culture See also: List of artistic depictions of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi Gandhi with Rabindranath Tagore, 1940 The word Mahatma, while often mistaken for Gandhi's given name in the West, is taken from the Sanskrit words maha (meaning Great) and atma (meaning Soul). Rabindranath Tagore is said to have accorded the title to Gandhi.[116] In his autobiography, Gandhi nevertheless explains that he never valued the title, and was often pained by it.[117] Followers and international influence Mahatma Gandhi on a 1969 postage stamp of the Soviet Union. Gandhi influenced important leaders and political movements. Leaders of the civil rights movement in the United States, including Martin Luther King and James Lawson, drew from the writings of Gandhi in the development of their own theories about non-violence.[118][119][120] Anti-apartheid activist and former President of South Africa, Nelson Mandela, was inspired by Gandhi.[121] Others include Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan,[122] Steve Biko, Aung San Suu Kyi,[123] and Benigno Aquino, Jr. (the Philippine opposition leader during the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos and father of current Philippine president Benigno Aquino III).[citation needed] "Christ gave us the goals and Mahatma Gandhi the tactics."—Martin Luther King Jr, 1955[124] In his early years, the former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela was a follower of the non-violent resistance philosophy of Gandhi.[121] Bhana and Vahed commented on these events as "Gandhi inspired succeeding generations of South African activists seeking to end White rule. This legacy connects him to Nelson Mandela...in a sense Mandela completed what Gandhi started." [26] Gandhi's life and teachings inspired many who specifically referred to Gandhi as their mentor or who dedicated their lives to spreading Gandhi's ideas. In Europe, Romain Rolland was the first to discuss Gandhi in his 1924 book Mahatma Gandhi, and Brazilian anarchist and feminist Maria Lacerda de Moura wrote about Gandhi in her work on pacifism. In 1931, notable European physicist Albert Einstein exchanged written letters with Gandhi, and called him "a role model for the generations to come" in a later writing about him.[125] Lanza del Vasto went to India in 1936 intending to live with Gandhi; he later returned to Europe to spread Gandhi's philosophy and founded the Community of the Ark in 1948 (modelled after Gandhi's ashrams). Madeleine Slade (known as "Mirabehn") was the daughter of a British admiral who spent much of her adult life in India as a devotee of Gandhi.[citation needed] In addition, the British musician John Lennon referred to Gandhi when discussing his views on non-violence.[126] At the Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival in 2007, former U.S. Vice-President and environmentalist Al Gore spoke of Gandhi's influence on him.[127] President of the United States Barack Obama in an address to a Joint Session of the Parliament of India said that: "I am mindful that I might not be standing before you today, as President of the United States, had it not been for Gandhi and the message he shared with America and the world."—Barack Obama in an address to a Joint Session of the Parliament of India, 2010[128] Obama at the Wakefield High School speech in Sept 2009, said that his biggest inspiration came from Mahatma Gandhi. His reply was in response to the question 'Who was the one person, dead or live, that you would choose to dine with?'. He continued that "He's somebody I find a lot of inspiration in. He inspired Dr. King with his message of nonviolence. He ended up doing so much and changed the world just by the power of his ethics." [129] The Mahatma Gandhi District in Houston, Texas, United States, an ethnic Indian enclave, is named after Gandhi. The district officially received its named on 16 January 2010 when the City of Houston held a naming ceremony.[130] Global holidays On 15 June 2007, it was announced that the "United Nations General Assembly" has "unanimously adopted" a resolution declaring 2 October as "the International Day of Non-Violence."[131] 30 January of every year is observed the School Day of Non-violence and Peace in schools of many countries.[132][133] In countries with a Southern Hemisphere school calendar, it can be observed on 30 March.[citation needed] Awards Monument to Mahatma Gandhi in New Belgrade, Serbia. On the monument is written "Non-violence is the essence of all religions". Time magazine named Gandhi the Man of the Year in 1930. Gandhi was also the runner-up to Albert Einstein as "Person of the Century"[134] at the end of 1999. Einstein said of Gandhi: Mahatma Gandhi's life achievement stands unique in political history. He has invented a completely new and humane means for the liberation war of an oppressed country, and practised it with greatest energy and devotion. The moral influence he had on the consciously thinking human being of the entire civilized world will probably be much more lasting than it seems in our time with its overestimation of brutal violent forces. Because lasting will only be the work of such statesmen who wake up and strengthen the moral power of their people through their example and educational works. We may all be happy and grateful that destiny gifted us with such an enlightened contemporary, a role model for the generations to come. Time Magazine named The 14th Dalai Lama, Lech Wa??sa, Martin Luther King, Cesar Chavez, Aung San Suu Kyi, Benigno Aquino, Jr., Desmond Tutu, and Nelson Mandela as Children of Gandhi and his spiritual heirs to non-violence.[135] The Government of India awards the annual Gandhi Peace Prize to distinguished social workers, world leaders and citizens. Nelson Mandela, the leader of South Africa's struggle to eradicate racial discrimination and segregation, is a prominent non-Indian recipient. In 2011, Time magazine named Gandhi as one of the top 25 political icons of all time.[136] Gandhi never received the Nobel Peace Prize, although he was nominated five times between 1937 and 1948, including the first-ever nomination by the American Friends Service Committee,[137] though he made the short list only twice, in 1937 and 1947.[138] Decades later, the Nobel Committee publicly declared its regret for the omission, and admitted to deeply divided nationalistic opinion denying the award.[66] Gandhi was nominated in 1948 but was assassinated before nominations closed. That year, the committee chose not to award the peace prize stating that "there was no suitable living candidate" and later research shows that the possibility of awarding the prize posthumously to Gandhi was discussed and that the reference to no suitable living candidate was to Gandhi.[138] When the 14th Dalai Lama was awarded the Prize in 1989, the chairman of the committee said that this was "in part a tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi."[138] Film and literature Mahatma Gandhi has been portrayed in film, literature, and in the theatre. Ben Kingsley portrayed Gandhi in the 1982 film Gandhi, which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. Gandhi is also a central theme in the 2006 Bollywood film Lage Raho Munna Bhai. The 2007 film, Gandhi, My Father explores the relationship between Gandhi and his son Harilal. The 1996 film, The Making of the Mahatma, documents Gandhi's time in South Africa.[139] Several biographers have undertaken the task of describing Gandhi's life. Among them are: D. G. Tendulkar with his Mahatma. Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in eight volumes, and Pyarelal and Sushila Nayyar with their Mahatma Gandhi in 10 volumes. There is also another documentary, titled Mahatma: Life of Gandhi, 1869–1948, which is 14 chapters and 6 hours long.[citation needed] The April 2010 biography, Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld contained controversial material speculating about Gandhi's sexual life.[140] Because of this material, the book was banned in the Indian state of Gujarat, his birthplace.[141] Lelyveld, however, stated that the press coverage "grossly distort[s]" the overall message of the book.[142] Current impact within India The Gandhi Mandapam Kanyakumari India, with its rapid economic modernization and urbanization, has rejected Gandhi's economics but accepted much of his politics and contuinues to revere his memory. Reporter Jim Yardley notes that, "modern India is hardly a Gandhian nation, if it ever was one. His vision of a village-dominated economy was shunted aside during his lifetime as rural romanticism, and his call for a national ethos of personal austerity and nonviolence has proved antithetical to the goals of an aspiring economic and military power." By contrast he is "given full credit for India’s political identity as a tolerant, secular democracy."[143] Gandhi's birthday, 2 October, is a national holiday in India, Gandhi Jayanti. Gandhi's image also appears on paper currency of all denominations issued by India, except for the one rupee note.[144] There are two temples in India dedicated to Gandhi.[145] One is located at Sambalpur in Orissa and the other at Nidaghatta village near Kadur in Chikmagalur district of Karnataka.[145] The Gandhi Memorial in Kanyakumari resembles central Indian Hindu temples in formThe Tamukkam or Summer Palace in Madurai now houses the Mahatma Gandhi Museum.[146] Anarchism portal Ethics portal Hinduism portal Human rights portal India portal Liberalism portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Social and political philosophy portal Notes ^ a b c Rajmohan Gandhi (2006). Gandhi: the man, his people, and the empire. University of California Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8. http://books.google.com/books?id=FauJL7LKXmkC. Retrieved 22 January 2012.  ^ Gangrade, K.D. (1 January 2004). "Role of Shanti Sainiks in the Global Race for Armaments". Moral Lessons From Gandhi S Autobiography And Other Essays. Concept Publishing Company. pp. 154–155. ISBN 978-81-8069-084-6. http://books.google.com/books?id=UODB6R_LmWsC. Retrieved 11 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi, M. K. (1982) [10 November 1921]. "The Momentous Issue". Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. 25 (electronic ed.). New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India. pp. 76–78. http://www.gandhiserve.org/cwmg/VOL025.PDF. Retrieved 11 January 2012. "Complete civil disobedience is rebellion without the element of violence in it. An out and out civil resister simply ignores the authority of the state. He becomes an outlaw claiming to disregard every unmoral state law. ...In doing all this he never uses force and never resists force when it is used against him. In fact, he invites imprisonment and other uses of force against himself..."  ^ Gandhi, M. K. (1976) [10 September 1935]. "Letter to P. Kodanda Rao". Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. 67 (1st April- 1st October 1938) (electronic ed.). New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India. p. 400. http://www.gandhiserve.org/cwmg/VOL067.PDF. Retrieved 11 January 2012. "But I found that even civil disobedience failed to convey the full meaning of the struggle. I therefore adopted the phrase civil resistance. Non-violence was always an integral part of our struggle."  ^ Pilisuk, Marc; Nagler, Michael N. (2011). Peace Movements Worldwide: Players and practices in resistance to war. ABC-CLIO. p. 233. ISBN 978-0-313-36482-2. http://books.google.com/books?id=GTJV2UcZVHcC. Retrieved 21 January 2012.  ^ Johnson, Richard L.; Gandhi, M. K. (2006). Gandhi's experiments with truth: essential writings by and about Mahatma Gandhi. Lexington Books. p. 279. ISBN 978-0-7391-1143-7. http://books.google.com/books?id=dRQcKsx-YgQC&pg=PA279. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ Anne M. Todd; Martin E. Marty (1 March 2004). Mohandas Gandhi (Gandhi means "grocer" in Gujarati). Infobase Publishing. p. 8. ISBN 978-0-7910-7864-8. http://books.google.com/books?id=svxDMQZ7fakC&pg=PA8. Retrieved 22 January 2012.  ^ Miller, Jake C. (2002). Prophets of a just society. Nova Publishers. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-59033-068-5. http://books.google.com/books?id=uiBNJWqtiVcC&pg=PA9. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ a b Majmudar, Uma (2005). Gandhi's pilgrimage of faith: from darkness to light. SUNY Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-7914-6405-2. http://books.google.com/books?id=xM4paHEq5oQC&pg=PA27. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ Fischer, Louis (2 November 2010). Gandhi: His Life and Message for the World. Penguin (USA). ISBN 978-0-451-53170-4. http://books.google.com/books?id=osSGRAAACAAJ. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ a b c d e f Tendulkar, D. G. (1951). Mahatma; life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. Delhi: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. http://books.google.com/books?id=LHJuAAAAMAAJ. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ Sannuti, Arun (6 April 2010). "Mohandas K. Gandhi (1869–1948) – Vegetarianism: The Road to Satyagraha". International Vegetarian Union (IVU). http://www.ivu.org/history/gandhi/road.html. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ Sorokin, Pitirim Aleksandrovich (March 2002). The ways and power of love: types, factors, and techniques of moral transformation. Templeton Foundation Press. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-890151-86-7. http://books.google.com/books?id=DGCleCxTkbIC&pg=PA169. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ Rudolph, Susanne Hoeber; Rudolph, Lloyd I. (15 April 1983). Gandhi, the traditional roots of charisma. University of Chicago Press. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-226-73136-0. http://books.google.com/books?id=JsPYNLAU9KYC&pg=PA48. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1940, pp. 5–7 ^ Gandhi 1940, p. 9 ^ Gandhi 1940, pp. 20–22 ^ a b Gandhi, Rajmohan (2006). Gandhi: the man, his people, and the empire. University of California Press. pp. 20–21. ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8. http://books.google.com/books?id=FauJL7LKXmkC&pg=PA20. Retrieved 13 January 2012.  ^ a b c d Brown, Judith Margaret (23 October 1991). Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-05125-4. http://books.google.com/books?id=boDAE8MLAJMC. Retrieved 13 January 2012.  ^ a b Parekh, Bhikhu C. (2001). Gandhi: a very short introduction. Oxford University Press. p. 6-9. ISBN 978-0-19-285457-5.  ^ Crafford, F. S. (4 May 2005). Jan Smuts: A Biography. Kessinger Publishing. pp. 69–70, 230. ISBN 978-1-4179-9290-4. http://books.google.com/?id=Cyy1PPBPBsYC&printsec=frontcover&dq=Jan+Smuts:+A+Biography#v=onepage&q=Jan%20Smuts%3A%20A%20Biography&f=false. Retrieved 21 January 2012.  ^ a b Gandhi, M. K.; Fischer, Louis (12 November 2002). The essential Gandhi: an anthology of his writings on his life, work and ideas. Random House Digital, Inc.. ISBN 978-1-4000-3050-7. http://books.google.com/books?id=gz6l-vCVgxQC. Retrieved 13 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1940, p. 99 ^ Gandhi 1940, p. 93 ^ Smith, Colleen (The Presidency) (1 October 2006). "Mbeki: Mahatma Gandhi Satyagraha 100th Anniversary (01/10/2006)". Speeches. http://www.polity.org.za. http://www.polity.org.za/article/mbeki-mahatma-gandhi-satyagraha-100th-anniversary-01102006-2006-10-01. Retrieved 20 January 2012.  ^ a b Bhana, Surendra; Vahed, Goolam H. (2005). The making of a political reformer: Gandhi in South Africa, 1893–1914. Manohar. pp. 44–45, 149. ISBN 978-81-7304-612-4. http://books.google.com/books?id=fF9uAAAAMAAJ. Retrieved 21 January 2012.  ^ Herman, Arthur (26 January 2010). Gandhi and Churchill: The Rivalry That Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age. Random House. p. 137. ISBN 978-1-4090-6363-6.  ^ Ganesh Prashad, "Whiggism in India," Political Science Quarterly, 966, 81#3 pp 412–431 in JSTOR ^ Chronology of Mahatma Gandhi's Life:India 1918 in WikiSource based on the Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. Based on public domain volumes. ^ Gandhi, M. K. (Translated by Desai, Mahadev H.) (1927). An autobiography, or The story of my experiments with truth. Ahmedabad: Navajiwan Publishing House. ISBN 9788172290085. http://www.archive.org/stream/AnAutobiographyOrTheStoryOfMyExperimentsWithTruth/autobiography#page/n0/mode/2up. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ a b Desai, Mahadev Haribhai (1930). "Preface". Day-to-day with Gandhi: secretary's diary. Hemantkumar Nilkanth (translation). Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan. Archived from the original on 3 June 2007. http://www.wikilivres.info/wiki/Day_to_Day_with_Gandhi/Volume_1/Preface. Retrieved 16 January 2012.  ^ 67. Appeal for enlistment, Nadiad, 22 June 1918 ^ 8. Letter to J. L. Maffey, Nadiad, 30 April 1918 ^ Andrews, C. F. (November 2008) [1930]. "VII – The Teaching of Ahimsa". Mahatma Gandhi's Ideas Including Selections from His Writings. Pierides Press. ISBN 978-1-4437-3309-0. http://books.google.com/books?id=3EAV6JhQmgkC. Retrieved 16 January 2012.  ^ Hardiman, David (April 2001). "Champaran and Gandhi: Planters, Peasants and Gandhian Politics by Jacques Pouchepadass (Review)". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 11 (1): 99–101. JSTOR 25188108.  ^ Spodek, Howard (February 1971). "On the Origins of Gandhi's Political Methodology: The Heritage of Kathiawad and Gujarat". The Journal of Asian Studies 30 (2): 361–372. JSTOR 2942919.  ^ Chakrabarty, Bidyut (2006). Social and political thought of Mahatma Gandhi. Routledge. pp. 91. ISBN 978-0-415-36096-8. http://books.google.com/books?id=4x34We-mY40C&pg=PA91. Retrieved 13 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 82. ^ a b Ross, David A.. The Virtual Life of Fizzy Oceans. Open Books. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-4524-3090-4. http://books.google.com/books?id=M7xMTL11tJQC&pg=PT118. Retrieved 17 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 89. ^ Unattributed (December 1931). "Gandhi Invents Spinning Wheel". Popular Science (Bonnier Corporation): 60. http://books.google.com/books?id=ESgDAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA60. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Shashi, S. S. (1996). Encyclopaedia Indica: India, Pakistan, Bangladesh. Anmol Publications. p. 9. ISBN 978-81-7041-859-7. http://books.google.com/books?id=Wv0vAQAAIAAJ. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 105. ^ a b c Roberts, Andrew (26 Mar 2011). "Among the Hagiographers (A book review of "Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India" by Joseph Lelyveld)". BookShelf (Wall Street Journal). http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703529004576160371482469358.html. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Thacker, Dhirubhai (1 January 2006). ""Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand" (entry)". In Amaresh Datta. The Encyclopaedia Of Indian Literature (Volume Two) (Devraj To Jyoti). Sahitya Akademi. pp. 1345–. ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0. http://books.google.com/books?id=zB4n3MVozbUC&pg=PA1345. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 131. ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 172. ^ a b Wolpert, Stanley (28 November 2002). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press US. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8.  ^ Norvell, Lyn (1997). "Gandhi and the Indian Women's Movement". British Library Journal (The British Library Board) 23 (1): 12–27. ISSN 0305-5167.  ^ Sarma, Bina Kumari (January 1994). "Gandhian Movement and Women's Awakening in Orissa". Indian Historical Review (Indian Council for Historical Research) 21 (1/2): 78–79. ISSN 0376-9836.  ^ Murali, Atlury (January 1985). "Non-Cooperation in Andhra in 1920–22: Nationalist Intelligentsia and the Mobilization of Peasantry". Indian Historical Review (Indian Council for Historical Research) 12 (1/2): 188–217. ISSN 0376-9836.  ^ M G Agrawal. Freedom Fighters of India (in Four Volumes). Gyan Publishing House. pp. 162–. ISBN 978-81-8205-468-4. http://books.google.com/books?id=zzbuJOC11BoC&pg=PA162. Retrieved 17 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 230-232. ^ Nayyar, Pyarelal (1956). Mahatma Gandhi—the last phase, Vol 1. Navajivan Publishing House. ISBN 0-85283-112-9. http://books.google.com/books?id=E8wBAAAAMAAJ. Retrieved 16 January 2012.  ^ Jones, Constance; Ryan, James D. (28 February 2007). Encyclopedia of Hinduism. Infobase Publishing. pp. 160–. ISBN 978-0-8160-5458-9. http://books.google.com/books?id=hZET2sSUVsgC&pg=PA160. Retrieved 13 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 246. ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 277-281. ^ Sarkar, Jayabrata (18 April 2006). "Power, Hegemony and Politics: Leadership Struggle in Congress in the 1930s". Modern Asian Studies (Cambridge University Press) 40 (2): 333–370. doi:10.1017/S0026749X0600179X.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 283-286. ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 309. ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 318. ^ Lapping, Brian (1 January 1989). End of empire. Paladin. ISBN 978-0-586-08870-8. http://books.google.com/books?id=xBsiAQAAIAAJ. Retrieved 16 January 2012.  ^ Keen, Shirin (Spring, 1998). "The Partition of India". Emory University. http://www.english.emory.edu/Bahri/Part.html. Retrieved 16 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand (5 January 1994). Jack, Homer A.. ed. The Gandhi reader: a source book of his life and writings. Grove Press. p. 418. ISBN 978-0-8021-3161-4.  ^ Wolpert, Stanley. Gandhi's Passion – The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-513060-X. http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/w/wolpert-gandhi.html.  ^ a b Tønnesson, Øyvind (1 December 1999). "Mahatma Gandhi, the Missing Laureate". Nobelprize.org. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/articles/gandhi/. Retrieved 16 January 2012.  ^ Metcalf, Barbara Daly; Metcalf, Thomas R. (28 September 2006). A concise history of modern India. Cambridge University Press. pp. 221–222. ISBN 978-0-521-86362-9. http://books.google.com/books?id=iuESgYNYPl0C. Retrieved 16 January 2012.  ^ Saikia, Bijoy Sankar (2 October 2006). "Why Mahatma Gandhi didn't get a Nobel Prize". CNN IBN-Live. http://ibnlive.in.com/news/why-mahatma-gandhi-didnt-get-a-nobel-prize/22985-3-single.html.  ^ Gandhi 1990, p. 472. ^ Vinay Lal. ‘Hey Ram’: The Politics of Gandhi’s Last Words. Humanscape 8, no. 1 (January 2001): pp. 34–38. ^ Nehru's address on Gandhi's death. Retrieved on 15 March 2007. ^ http://www.liveindia.com/redfort/rajghat.html ^ "Over a million get last darshan". The Indian Express. 1 February 1948. http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=P9oYG7HA76QC&dat=19480201&printsec=frontpage&hl=en. Retrieved 19 January 2012.  ^ "Of all faiths and races, together they shed their silent tears". The Indian Express. 31 January 1948. http://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=P9oYG7HA76QC&dat=19480201&printsec=frontpage&hl=en. Retrieved 19 January 2012.  ^ Khan, Yasmin (January 2011). "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state" (abstract). Modern Asian Studies (Cambridge University Press) 45 (1): 57–80. doi:10.1017/S0026749X10000223. http://journals.cambridge.org/abstract_S0026749X10000223. Retrieved 21 January 2012.  ^ a b c d e Ramesh, Randeep (16 January 2008). "Gandhi's ashes to rest at sea, not in a museum". The Guardian (London). http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2008/jan/16/india.international. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Kumar, Shanti (2006). Gandhi meets primetime: globalization and nationalism in Indian television. University of Illinois Press. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-252-07244-4. http://books.google.com/books?id=abPsWgqrmMMC&pg=PA170. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Ferrell, David (27 September 2001). "A Little Serenity in a City of Madness" (Abstract). Los Angeles Times: pp. B 2. http://pqasb.pqarchiver.com/latimes/access/82514621.html?FMT=ABS&FMTS=ABS:FT&type=current&date=Sep+27%2C+2001&author=DAVID+FERRELL&pub=Los+Angeles+Times&edition=&startpage=B.2&desc=Surroundings%3A+Lake+Shrine%3B+%27A+Little+Serenity+in+a+City+of+Madness%27%3B+Meditation+Gardens+in+Pacific+Palisades+Are+a+Place+to+Walk%2C+Think+and+Pray. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Gokhale, Balkrishna Govind (1972). "Gandhi and History". History and Theory (Blackwell Publishing (for Wesleyan College)) 11 (2): 214–225. doi:10.2307/2504587. JSTOR 2504587.  ^ Spodek, Howard (Feb 1971). "On the Origins of Gandhi's Political Methodology: The Heritage of Kathiawad and Gujarat". Journal of Asian Studies (Association for Asian Studies) 30 (2): 361–372. JSTOR 2942919. http://central.d127.org/library/classprojects/gandhi/Documents/OntheOriginsofGandhiPolMeth.pdf. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ Murthy, B. Srinivasa, ed (1987). Mahatma Gandhi and Leo Tolstoy: Letters. Long Beach, California: Long Beach Publications. ISBN 0941910032. http://bsmurthy.com/download/Mahatma_Gandhi_Leostoy_Letters_by_BSM.pdf. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Green, Martin Burgess (1986). The origins of nonviolence: Tolstoy and Gandhi in their historical settings. Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-00414-3. http://books.google.com/books?id=D0luAAAAMAAJ. Retrieved 17 January 2012.  ^ Bhana, Surendra (1979). "Tolstoy Farm, A Satyagrahi's Battle Ground". Journal of Indian History 57 (2/3): 431–440.  ^ Watson, I. Bruce (1977). "Satyagraha: The Gandhian Synthesis". Journal of Indian History 55 (1/2): 325–335.  ^ Parel, Anthony (10 August 2006). Gandhi's philosophy and the quest for harmony. Cambridge University Press. p. 195. ISBN 978-0-521-86715-3. http://books.google.com/books?id=MQhz0fW0HZUC&pg=PA195. Retrieved 13 January 2012.  ^ Gandhi, M.K. “Some Rules of Satyagraha” Young India (Navajivan) 23 February 1930 (The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi vol. 48, p. 340) ^ R. K. Prabhu & U. R. Rao, editors; from section “Power of Satyagraha,” of the book The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi, Ahemadabad, India, Revised Edition, 1967. ^ Gandhi, M. K. (1982) [Young India, 16 June 1920]. "156. The Law of Suffering". Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. 20 (electronic ed.). New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India. pp. 396–399. http://www.gandhiserve.org/cwmg/VOL020.PDF. Retrieved 14 January 2012.  ^ Asirvatham, Eddy. Political Theory. S.chand. ISBN 8121903467.  ^ Mary Ellen Snodgrass, Encyclopedia of the Literature of Empire (2009) p 316 ^ James Geary, Geary's Guide to the World's Great Aphorists (2007) p 87 ^ Louis Fischer (1950). The life of Mahatma Gandhi. Harper. p. 348. http://books.google.com/?id=pHcGAQAAIAAJ&pg=PA348&q=%22cliffs%22.  ^ William Borman, Gandhi and non-violence (1996) p 253 ^ Stephen Hay, "The Making of a Late-Victorian Hindu: M.K. Gandhi in London, 1888–1891," Victorian Studies, (Aut. 1989) 33#1 pp 75–98 in JSTOR ^ Chitrita Banerji, Eating India: an odyssey into the food and culture of the land of spices (2007) p. 169 ^ Wolpert, Gandhi's passion p. 22 ^ Cited in Mohit Chakrabarti, Gandhian Socio-Aesthetics (1997) p. 24 ^ See also Carol Becker, "Gandhi's Body and Further Representations of War and Peace," Art Journal 65#4 (2006) pp 79+ ^ Tim Pratt and James Vernon, "'Appeal from this fiery bed . . .': The Colonial Politics of Gandhi's Fasts and Their Metropolitan Reception," Journal of British Studies, Jan 2005, 44#1 pp 92–114 ^ Joseph S. Alter, "Gandhi's body, Gandhi's truth: Nonviolence and the biomoral imperative of public health," Journal of Asian Studies, (May 1996) 35#2 pp 301–22 in JSTOR ^ Vinay Lal, "Nakedness, Nonviolence, and Brahmacharya: Gandhi's Experiments in Celibate Sexuality," Journal of the History of Sexuality, (Jan/Apr 2000), Vol. 9 Issue 1/2, pp 105–36 ^ Richards, Glynn (1996). A Source-Book on Modern Hinduism. Routledge. ISBN 9780700703173. http://books.google.com/?id=BGxgNTBmFNEC&pg=PA202&dq=Nai+Talim  ^ Basic Education (Nai Talim) ^ Dinabandhu Dehury: Mahatma Gandhi's Contribution to Education ^ Snow, Edgar. The Message of Gandhi. SEP 27 March 1948. "Like Marx, Gandhi hated the state and wished to eliminate it, and he told me he considered himself 'a philosophical anarchist.'" ^ Articles on and by Gandhi, Retrieved on 7 June 2008. ^ Jesudasan, Ignatius. A Gandhian theology of liberation. Gujarat Sahitya Prakash: Ananda India, 1987, pp 236–237 ^ From Discussion with BG Kher and others, 15 August 1940. Gandhi's Wisdom Box (1942), edited by Dewan Ram Parkash, p. 67 also in Collected works of Mahatma Gandhi Vol. 79 (PDF), p. 122 ^ Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand; Tolstoy, Leo (September 1987). B. Srinivasa Murthy. ed. Mahatma Gandhi and Leo Tolstoy letters. Long Beach Publications.  ^ Easwaran, Eknath. Gandhi the Man. Nilgiri Press, 1998. p. 33. ^ a b Chapter VI Hind Swaraj by M.K. Gandhi ^ Bhattacharyya, Buddhadeva. Evolution of the political philosophy of Gandhi. Calcutta Book House: Calcutta, 1969, p. 479 ^ Peerless Communicator by V.N. Narayanan. Life Positive Plus, October–December 2002 ^ Gandhi, M. K. (in English; trans. from Gujarati) (PDF). Unto this Last: A paraphrase. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. ISBN 81-7229-076-4. http://wikilivres.info/wiki/Unto_This_Last_%E2%80%94_M._K._Gandhi.  ^ Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi (CWMG) Controversy (gandhiserve) ^ Tagore, Rabindranath (15 December 1998). Dutta, Krishna. ed. Rabindranath Tagore: an anthology. Robinson, Andrew. Macmillan. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-312-20079-4.  ^ Desai, Mahadev H. (1983). Autobiography: the story of my experiments with truth. Mineola, N.Y: Dover. p. viii. ISBN 0-486-24593-4. http://books.google.com/?id=OXoRs7Kxs_YC&pg=PR1.  ^ Unattributed. "King’s Trip to India". Mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009. http://web.archive.org/web/20090321002316/http://mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu/index.php/kingpapers/article/kings_trip_to_india/. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ Sidner, Sara (17 February 2009). "King moved, as father was, on trip to Gandhi's memorial". cnn.com Asia-Pacific (CNN). http://www.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/asiapcf/02/17/king.anniversaryvisit/index.html. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ D'Souza, Placido P. (20 January 2003). "Commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.: Gandhi's influence on King". SF Gate (San Francisco Chronicle). http://sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?file=/chronicle/archive/2003/01/20/ED163673.DTL. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ a b Nelson Mandela, The Sacred Warrior: The liberator of South Africa looks at the seminal work of the liberator of India, Time Magazine, 3 January 2000. ^ Pal, Amitabh (February 2002). "A pacifist uncovered- Abdul Ghaffar Khan, Pakistani pacifist". The Progressive. http://progressive.org/mag_amitpalabdul. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ "An alternative Gandhi". The Tribune. India. 22 February 2004. http://www.tribuneindia.com/2004/20040222/spectrum/book1.htm. Retrieved 12 March 2009.  ^ Tougas, Shelley (1 January 2011). Birmingham 1963: How a Photograph Rallied Civil Rights Support. Capstone Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-7565-4398-3. http://books.google.com/books?id=zzWQKHKcrOMC&pg=PT12. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ "Einstein on Gandhi (Einstein's letter to Gandhi – Courtesy:Saraswati Albano-Müller & Notes by Einstein on Gandhi – Source: The Hebrew University of Jerusalem )". Gandhiserve.org. 18 October 1931. http://www.gandhiserve.org/streams/einstein.html. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ Gilmore, Mikal (5 December 2005). "Lennon Lives Forever". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 28 May 2007. http://web.archive.org/web/20070528225215/http://www.rollingstone.com/news/story/8898300/lennon_lives_forever. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ Kar, Kalyan (23 June 2007). "Of Gandhigiri and Green Lion, Al Gore wins hearts at Cannes". Cannes Lions 2007. exchange4media. http://www.exchange4media.com/Cannes/2007/fullstory2007.asp?section_id=13&news_id=26524&tag=21387&pict=2. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ "Remarks by the President to the Joint Session of the Indian Parliament in New Delhi, India, Parliament House, New Delhi, India". The White House. 8 November 2010. http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2010/11/08/remarks-president-joint-session-indian-parliament-new-delhi-india. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ Associated Press (8 September 2009). "Obama steers clear of politics in school pep talk". msnbc.msn.com. msnbc.com. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/32723625/ns/politics-white_house/t/obama-steers-clear-politics-school-pep-talk/#.Tx5wvqWyaOw. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ Moreno, Jenalia (16 January 2010). "Houston community celebrates district named for Gandhi". Chron.com. Houston Chronicle. http://www.chron.com/disp/story.mpl/metropolitan/6818599.html. Retrieved 24 January 2012.  ^ Chaudhury, Nilova (15 June 2007). "2 October is global non-violence day". Hindustan Times (India). http://www.hindustantimes.com/storypage/storypage.aspx?id=54580f5e-15a0-4aaf-baa3-8f403b5688fa&&Headline=October+2+is+Int'l+Non-Violence+Day. Retrieved 15 June 2007.  ^ DENIP, School Day of Non-violence and Peace. Denip.webcindario.com (31 January 1983). Retrieved on 4 June 2011. ^ School Day of Non-violence and Peace. Cartadelapaz.org (30 January 2009). Retrieved on 4 June 2011. ^ Rushdie, Salman (13 April 1998). "The Time 100". Time Magazine Online. http://www.time.com/time/time100/leaders/profile/gandhi.html. Retrieved 3 March 2009.  ^ The Children Of Gandhi. Time. Retrieved on 21 April 2007. ^ "Top 25 Political Icons". Time Magazine Online. 4 February 2011. http://www.time.com/time/specials/packages/article/0,28804,2046285_2045996_2045906,00.html. Retrieved 9 February 2011.  ^ AFSC's Past Nobel Nominations. ^ a b c Tønnesson, Øyvind (1 December 1999). "Mahatma Gandhi, the Missing Laureate". nobelprize.org. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/articles/gandhi/index.html.  ^ ""Making of the Mahatma"". February 1997. hinduismtoday.com. http://www.hinduismtoday.com/modules/smartsection/item.php?itemid=4798. Retrieved 12 January 2012.  ^ Kunzru, Hari (29 March 2011). "Appreciating Gandhi Through His Human Side". New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/30/books/in-great-soul-joseph-lelyveld-re-examines-gandhi.html. Retrieved 5 January 2012.  ^ Indian state bans Gandhi book. Adelaide Now (30 March 2011). Retrieved on 4 June 2011. ^ US author slams Gandhi gay claim. The Australian (29 March 2011). Retrieved on 4 June 2011. ^ Yardley, Jim (6 November 2010). "Obama Invokes Gandhi, Whose Ideal Eludes India". Asia-Pacific. New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/07/world/asia/07gandhi.html. Retrieved 22 January 2012.  ^ "Reserve Bank of India – Bank Notes". Rbi.org.in. http://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/ic_banknotes.aspx. Retrieved 2011-11-05.  ^ a b Kaggere, Niranjan (2 October 2010). "Here, Gandhi is God". www.BangaloreMirror.com. http://www.bangaloremirror.com/article/10/201010022010100204445248420e2db29/Here-Gandhi-is-god.html. Retrieved 29 January 2011.  ^ Abram, David; Edwards, Nick (27 November 2003). The Rough Guide to South India. Rough Guides. p. 506. ISBN 978-1-84353-103-6. http://books.google.com/?id=sEhJBfbhTAAC&printsec=frontcover&dq=The+Rough+Guide+to+South+India+%282003%29#v=onepage&q=The%20Rough%20Guide%20to%20South%20India%20%282003%29&f=false. Retrieved 21 January 2012.  References Bhana, Surendra and Goolam Vahed. The Making of a Political Reformer: Gandhi in South Africa, 1893–1914. New Delhi: Manohar, 2005. Bondurant, Joan V. Conquest of Violence: The Gandhian Philosophy of Conflict. Princeton UP, 1988 ISBN 0-691-02281-X Brown, Judith M. Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope (1991); 456pp; a major scholarly biography Brown, Judith M., and Anthony Parel, eds. The Cambridge Companion to Gandhi (Cambridge Companions to Religion) (2011), advanced essays by scholars excerpt and text search Chadha, Yogesh. Gandhi: A Life. ISBN 0-471-35062-1 Easwaran, Eknath. Gandhi the Man. ISBN 978-1586380557 ebook: ISBN 978-1586380670 Fischer, Louis. The Life of Mahatma Gandhi. Harper & Row, New York, 1950. ISBB 0-06-091038-0 (1983 pbk.) Gandhi, Rajmohan (2007). Gandhi: the man, his people, and the empire. University of California Press, 2008. ISBN 0520255704, 9780520255708.  Hardiman, David. Gandhi in His Time and Ours: The Global Legacy of His Ideas (2003), 256pp Herman, Arthur. Gandhi and Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age (2009) Lelyveld, Joseph. Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle with India (2011), 448pp; a major scholarly biography excerpt and text search Rühe, Peter. Gandhi: A Photo biography. ISBN 0-7148-9279-3 Sharp, Gene. Gandhi as a Political Strategist, with Essays on Ethics and Politics. Boston: Extending Horizon Books, 1979. Singh, S. R. "The Historiography of the Gandhian Movement: A Critique," Indian Historical Review, (Jan 1985) Vol. 12 Issue 1/2, pp 218–250 Sofri, Gianni. Gandhi and India: A Century in Focus. (1995) ISBN 1-900624-12-5 Primary sources Dalton, Dennis (ed). Mahatma Gandhi: Selected Political Writings. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company, 1996. ISBN 0-87220-330-1 Fischer, Louis. The Essential Gandhi: An Anthology of His Writings on His Life, Work, and Ideas. Vintage: New York, 2002. (reprint edition) ISBN 1-4000-3050-1 Gandhi, M.K. Satyagraha in South Africa Gandhi, M.K. The Gandhi Reader: A Sourcebook of His Life and Writings. Homer Jack (ed.) Grove Press, New York, 1956. Gandhi, M.K. Hind Swaraj and Other Writings Centenary Edition (Cambridge Texts in Modern Politics) ed. by Anthony J. Parel (2009) Gandhi, M.K. (1940). An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments With Truth (2 ed.). Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. pp. xii, 404. ISBN 0-8070-5909-9.  Also available at Wikisource. Gandhi, Mahatma. The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi. New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India, 1994. External links Find more about Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi on Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions and translations from Wiktionary Images and media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Source texts from Wikisource Gandhi Smriti — Government of India website Mani Bhavan Gandhi Sangrahalaya Gandhi Museum & Library [show] v d e Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi Family Kasturba · Harilal · Manilal · Ramdas · Devdas · Samaldas · Arun · Rajmohan · Tushar · Gopalkrishna Influences Ahimsa · Ashram · Bhagavad Gita · Henry David Thoreau  · Civil disobedience · Fasting · Hinduism · Jainism · John Ruskin · Leo Tolstoy · The Kingdom of God Is Within You · The Masque of Anarchy · Pacifism · Sermon on the Mount · Shrimad Rajchandra · Unto This Last · Vegetarianism Life Civil rights movement in South Africa · Bardoli Satyagraha · Champaran and Kheda Satyagraha · Non-cooperation · Chauri Chaura · Purna Swaraj · Salt Satyagraha · Vaikom Satyagraha · Poona Pact · Quit India · Assassination Philosophy Gandhism · Economics · Sarvodaya · Satyagraha · The Story of My Experiments with Truth · Swadeshi · Swaraj Associates Vinoba Bhave · Vallabhbhai Patel · Mirabehn · C. F. Andrews · Narhari Parikh · Ravi Shankar Vyas · Mohanlal Pandya · Mahadev Desai · Abbas Tyabji · Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan · Dada Dharmadhikari · J. C. Kumarappa · Hermann Kallenbach Legacy Gujarat Vidyapith · Kashi Vidyapeeth · Memorial Hospital · Jamia Millia Islamia · Gandhi Peace Prize · Artistic depictions · Gandhigiri  · Seven Blunders of the World Influenced Martin Luther King, Jr. · James Lawson · James Bevel · Nelson Mandela · Steve Biko · Aung San Suu Kyi · Maria Lacerda de Moura · Lanza del Vasto Memorials Physical Kanyakumari · Martin Luther King, Jr., National Historic Site · Pietermaritzburg · Rajghat  · National Gandhi Museum · Gandhi Smriti Observances Gandhi Jayanti · International Day of Non-Violence · Season for Nonviolence  Category ·  Commons ·   Wikiquotes [show] v d e Indian National Congress Presidents Bonnerjee · Naoroji · Tyabji · Yule · Wedderburn · Mehta · Charlappa · Bonnerjee · Dadabhai Naoroji · Webb · Banerjea · Sayani · Nair · A. M. Bose · Dutt · Chandavarkar · Wacha · Banerjea · L. Ghosh · H. Cotton · Gokhale · Naoroji · R. Ghosh · (1907-1908) Malaviya · Wedderburn · Dar · Mudholkar · Bahadur · B. N. Bose · Sinha · Mazumdar · Besant · Malaviya · Imam · M. Nehru · Rai · C. Vijayaraghavachariar · Khan · Das · M. Ali · A. K. Azad · M. Gandhi · Naidu · Iyengar · Ansari · M. Nehru · J. Nehru · S. V. Patel · Malaviya (1932-1933) · Nellie Sengupta · Rajendra Prasad (1934-1935) · J. Nehru (1936-1937) · S. C. Bose · (1938-1939) · A. K. Azad (1940-1946) · Kripalani · Sitaramayya (1948-1949) · Tandon · J. Nehru (1951-1954) · Dhebar (1955-1959) · I. Gandhi · Reddy (1960-1963) · K. Kamaraj (1964-1967) · S. Nijalingappa (1968-1969) · J. Ram (1970-1971) · D. Sharma (1972-1974) · Baruah (1975-1977) · I. Gandhi (1978-1984) · R. Gandhi (1985-1991) · Narasimha Rao (1992-1996) · Kesri (1996-1998) · S. Gandhi (1998-present) Frontal Organizations Seva Dal · Mahila Congress · Indian Youth Congress · National Students Union of India · Indian National Trade Union Congress Internal Organizations Congress President · Working President · Congress Working Committee · Central Election Committee · All India Congress Committee · Pradesh Congress Committee Pradesh committees Andhra Pradesh PCC · Assam PCC · Bihar PCC · Chhatisgarh PCC · Delhi PCC · Gujarat PCC · Haryana PCC · Himachal Pradesh PCC · Jammu & Kashmir PCC · Jharkhand PCC · Karnataka PCC · Kerala PCC · Maharashtra PCC · Madhya Pradesh PCC · Meghalaya PCC · Mizoram PCC · Mumbai PCC · Nagaland PCC · Orissa PCC · Puducherry PCC · Punjab PCC · Rajasthan PCC · Tamil Nadu PCC · Tripura PCC · Uttarakhand PCC · Uttar Pradesh PCC · West Bengal PCC History Statewise Election history of Congress Party · Nehru-Gandhi family · Congress Radio · 10 Janpath · The Emergency · Bofors scandal · INA Defence Committee · Indian National Congress (Organisation) · Breakaway parties [show] v d e Time Persons of the Year [show]  1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mahatma Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh Samuel Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie I (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong May-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) [show]  1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King, Jr. (1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts: William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) [show]  1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wa??sa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeffrey P. Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) [show]  2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Book:Time Persons of the Year [show] v d e Asian of the Century The Big Five 20th century · Asian people · Asian Century Politics and Government: Deng Xiaoping (China) Business and Economics: Akio Morita (Japan) Arts, Literature and Culture: Akira Kurosawa (Japan) Science and Technology: Charles K. Kao (China/U.S.) Moral and Spiritual Leadership: Mohandas K. Gandhi (India) AsianWeek · CNN · TIME Asia [show] v d e Indian independence movement History Colonisation · East India Company · British India · French India · Portuguese India · Plassey · Buxar · Anglo-Mysore Wars · Anglo-Maratha Wars (First · Second · Third) · Polygar War · Vellore Mutiny · First Anglo-Sikh War · Second Anglo-Sikh War · Rebellion of 1857 · British Raj  · more Philosophies and ideologies Indian nationalism · Swaraj · Hindu nationalism · Gandhism · Satyagraha · Indian Muslim nationalism · Swadeshi · Socialism · Khilafat Movement Events and movements Partition of Bengal · Revolutionaries · Delhi-Lahore Conspiracy · The Indian Sociologist · The Sedetious conspiracy · Champaran and Kheda · Rowlatt Committee · Rowlatt Bills · Jallianwala Bagh Massacre · Non-Cooperation · Qissa Khwani Bazaar massacre · Flag Satyagraha · Bardoli · 1928 Protests · Nehru Report · Purna Swaraj · Salt Satyagraha · Round table conferences · Act of 1935 · Legion Freies Indien · Cripps' mission · Quit India · Indian National Army · Bombay Mutiny · Coup d'État de Yanaon · Provisional Government of India Organisations Indian National Congress · All-India Muslim League · Anushilan Samiti · Jugantar · Arya Samaj · Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh · India House · Berlin Committee · Ghadar · Home Rule · Khaksar Tehrik · Khudai Khidmatgar · Hindustan Republican Association · Swaraj Party · Indian Independence League · All India Kisan Sabha · Azad Hind · more Social reformers Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi · Rahul Sankrityayan · Mahatma Jyotirao Phule · Gopal Ganesh Agarkar · Shahu Maharaj · Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar · Dhondo Keshav Karve · Vitthal Ramji Shinde · Mahadev Govind Ranade · Swami Dayananda Saraswati · Ramakrishna  · Swami Vivekananda · Swami Sahajanand Saraswati · Vinoba Bhave · Baba Amte · Ram Mohan Roy · Gopal Hari Deshmukh Indian independence activists Puli Thevar · Yashwantrao Holkar · Rahul Sankrityayan · Swami Sahajanand Saraswati · Tipu Sultan · Veerapandiya Kattabomman · Sangolli Rayanna · Baba Ram Singh · Mangal Pandey · Rae Ahmed Nawaz Khan Kharal · Bakht Khan · Veer Kunwar Singh · Rani of Jhansi · Bahadur Shah Zafar · Swami Dayanand Saraswati · Bal Gangadhar Tilak · Gopal Krishna Gokhale · Dadabhai Naoroji · Bhikaiji Cama · Shyamji Krishna Varma · Annie Besant · Har Dayal · Subramanya Bharathi · Lala Lajpat Rai · Bipin Chandra Pal · Rash Behari Bose · Chittaranjan Das · Bidhan Chandra Roy · Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan · Maulana Azad · Ashfaqullah Khan · Ram Prasad Bismil · Chandrasekhar Azad · Rajaji · K. M. Munshi · Bhagat Singh · Sarojini Naidu  · Achyut Patwardhan · Purushottam Das Tandon · Alluri Sitaramaraju · M. Ali Jinnah · Sardar Patel · Subhash Chandra Bose · Jawaharlal Nehru · Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi · Allama Mashriqi · Kotwal Dhan Singh Gurjar · V. K. Krishna Menon · more British leaders Clive · Outram · Dalhousie · Irwin · Linlithgow · Wavell · Cripps · Mountbatten · more Independence Simla Conference  · Cabinet Mission · Indian Independence Act · Partition of India · Political integration · Constitution · Republic of India [show] v d e Hindu reform movements Ayyavazhi  · Arya Samaj  · Divine Life Society  · Hindutva · ISKCON  · Ramakrishna Mission  · Sri Aurobindo Ashram · Swadhyay Parivar  · Topics Bhakti · Caste · Persecution of Hindus · Shuddhi · Women in Hinduism Reformers Raja Ram Mohun Roy · B.G. Tilak · Mahatma Gandhi · Sri Aurobindo · Yogananda · M.S. Golwalkar · Harsh Narain · The Mother ·  · Ramakrishna · Swami Vivekananda · Maharshi Dayananda Saraswati · Satsvarupa dasa Goswami · V.D. Savarkar · Swami Sivananda · Swami Vipulananda · Arumuga Navalar  · Pandurang Shastri Athavale · Ram Swarup · Sita Ram Goel · Arun Shourie · more [show] v d e Social and political philosophy Philosophers Adi Shankara Plato Vaisheshika Ny?ya S?tras Augustine Marsilius Machiavelli Grotius Montesquieu Comte Bosanquet Spencer Malebranche Durkheim Santayana Royce Russell Confucius Hobbes Leibniz Hume Kant Rousseau Locke Burke Smith Bentham Mill Thoreau Marx Gandhi Gentile Maritain Berlin Schmitt Debord Camus Sartre Foucault Rawls Popper ?ilas Habermas Kirk Oakeshott Nozick Alinsky Chomsky Baudrillard Badiou Strauss Rand Žižek Walzer Social theories Anarchism Authoritarianism Conservatism Liberalism Libertarianism National liberalism Socialism Utilitarianism Conflict theory Consensus theory Social concepts Society War Law Justice Peace Rights Revolution Civil disobedience Democracy Social contract more... Related articles Philosophy of economics Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Jurisprudence Philosophy of social science Philosophy of love Philosophy of sex Portal Category Task Force Discussion Changes Authority control: PND: 118639145 | LCCN: n79041626 | VIAF: 71391324 | WorldCat Persondata Name Gandhi, Mohandas Karamchand Alternative names Gandhi, Mahatma Short description Non-violent political leader during Indian independence and Hindu reformer Date of birth 2 October 1869 Place of birth Porbandar, Gujarat, India Date of death 30 January 1948 Place of death Birla House, New Delhi, India Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mohandas_Karamchand_Gandhi&oldid=472956485" View page ratings Rate this page Rate this page Page ratings What's this? Current average ratings. Trustworthy Objective Complete Well-written I am highly knowledgeable about this topic (optional) I have a relevant college/university degree It is part of my profession It is a deep personal passion The source of my knowledge is not listed here I would like to help improve Wikipedia, send me an e-mail (optional) We will send you a confirmation e-mail. We will not share your e-mail address with outside parties as per our feedback privacy statement. Submit ratings Saved successfully Your ratings have not been submitted yet Your ratings have expired Please reevaluate this page and submit new ratings. An error has occured. Please try again later. Thanks! Your ratings have been saved. Please take a moment to complete a short survey. Start survey Maybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved. Do you want to create an account? An account will help you track your edits, get involved in discussions, and be a part of the community. Create an accountorLog in Maybe later Thanks! Your ratings have been saved. Did you know that you can edit this page? Edit this page Maybe later Categories: Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi 20th-century philosophers Alumni of University College London Anarcho-pacifists Anti-poverty advocates Ascetics Assassinated Indian politicians Attempted assassination survivors Deaths by firearm in India Expatriates in South Africa Founders of Indian schools and colleges Gandhians Gujarati literature Gujarati people Gujarati writers Hindu pacifists Indian anarchists Indian anti-war activists Indian autobiographers Indian barristers Indian civil rights activists Indian expatriates in the United Kingdom Indian Hindus Indian humanitarians Indian independence activists Indian memoirists Indian murder victims Indian pacifists Contemporary Indian philosophers Indian politicians Indian socialists Indian tax resisters Indian vegetarians International opponents of apartheid in South Africa Murdered anarchists Natal Indian Congress politicians Nonviolence advocates People murdered in India People of British India People of the Second Boer War Presidents of the Indian National Congress Recipients of the Kaisar-i-Hind Medal South African Indian Congress politicians Tolstoyans 1869 births 1948 deaths People from Porbandar Indian emigrants to South Africa Prisoners and detainees of British India Relief workers in Noakhali Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi family Hidden categories: Articles with inconsistent citation formats Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing Gujarati language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2011 Use British English from October 2011 Use dmy dates from January 2012 Wikipedia articles with authority control information Personal tools Log in / create account Namespaces Article Talk Variants Views Read View source View history Actions Search Navigation Main page Contents Featured content Current events Random article Donate to Wikipedia Interaction Help About Wikipedia Community portal Recent changes Contact Wikipedia Toolbox What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Cite this page Rate this page Print/export Create a book Download as PDF Printable version Languages ???????? Afrikaans Alemannisch ???? ??????? Aragonés ??????? Asturianu Az?rbaycanca ????? Bân-lâm-gú ?????????? ??????????? (???????????)? ??????? Bikol Central ????????? Bosanski Brezhoneg Català ?esky Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ?????????? Eesti ???????? Español Esperanto Euskara ????? Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ?? ??????? ??? ??????? ?????? Hrvatski Ido ???? ???/????????????? ??????? Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano ????? Basa Jawa ????? ??????? ??????? Kiswahili Kurdî Ladino Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvi? Lingála Lumbaart Magyar ?????????? ?????? ????? ???? ???????? Bahasa Melayu ?????? ?????????? Nederlands ?????? ????? ???? ??? ?Norsk (bokmål)? ?Norsk (nynorsk)? Occitan ????? ?????? ???? ????????? Tok Pisin Polski Português Român? Romani Runa Simi ?????????? ??????? ???? ???? ????????? Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu ????? Simple English ???? Sloven?ina Slovenš?ina Soomaaliga ????? ?????? / Srpski Srpskohrvatski / ?????????????? Basa Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ????? ???????/Tatarça ?????? ??? Türkçe ?????????? ???? Vèneto Ti?ng Vi?t Võro ?? Winaray ?? ?????? Yorùbá ?? Žemait?ška ?? This page was last modified on 24 January 2012 at 10:17. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. See Terms of use for details. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Contact us Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Mobile view